How doth the king?
Excellent well.
His cares are now all ended.
I hope, not dead.
He's walked the way of nature.
To our purposes, he lives nomore.
I would His Majesty had calledme with him.
The service that I truly did hislife
hath left me open to allinjuries.
Indeed, I think the young kingloves you not.
I know he doth not
and do arm myself to welcome thecondition of the time,
which cannot look more hideouslyupon me
than I have drawn it in myfantasy.
Here come the heavy issue ofdead Harry.
Oh, that the living Harry
had the temper of either worstof these three gentlemen.
How many nobles then might keeptheir place
that must strike sail to spiritsof vile sort.
Oh, God, I fear all will beoverthrown.
Good morrow, and God save YourMajesty.
This new and gorgeous garment,majesty,
sits not so easy on me as youthink.
Brothers, you mix your sadnesswith some fear.
This is the English, not theTurkish court.
Not Amurath an Amurath succeeds,but Harry Harry.
Yet be sad, good brothers,
for, by my faith, it very wellbecomes you.
Sorrow so royally in you appears
that I will deeply put thefashion on
and wear it in my heart.
Why then, be sad.
But entertain no more of it,good brothers,
than a joint burden laid upon usall.
For me, by heaven, I bid you beassured,
I'll be your father and yourbrother too.
Let me but bear your love, andI'll bear your cares.
Yet weep that Harry's dead, andso will I.
But Harry lives that shallconvert those tears
by number into hours ofhappiness.
We hope no otherwise from YourMajesty.
You all look strangely on me,
and you most.
You are, I think, assured I loveyou not.
I am assured, if I be rightlymeasured,
Your Majesty hath no just causeto hate me.
No?
How might a prince of my greathopes
forget so great indignities youlaid upon me?
What?
Rate, rebuke, and roughly sendto prison
the immediate heir of England.
Was this easy?
May this be washed in lethe andforgotten?
I then did use the person ofyour fatheró
the image of his power lay thenin meó
and, in the administration ofhis law,
whiles I was busy for thecommonwealth,
Your Highness pleased to forgetmy place,
the majesty and power of law andjustice,
the image of the king whom Ipresented,
and struck me in my very seat ofjudgment,
whereon, as an offender to yourfather,
I gave bold way to my authorityand did commit you.
If this were ill done,
be you contented wearing now thegarland,
to have a son set your decreesat naught,
to pluck down justice from yourawful bench,
to trip the course of law andblunt the sword
that guards the peace and safetyof your person.
Behold yourself so by a sondisdained,
and then imagine me taking yourpart
and in your power soft silencingyour son.
After this cold considerance,sentence me.
And, as you are a king,
speak in your state what I havedone
that misbecame my place, myperson,
or my liege's sovereignty.
You are right, Justice,
and you weigh this well.
Therefore still bear the balanceand the sword.
And I do wish your honors mayincrease
till you do live to see a son ofmine
offend you and obey you, as Idid.
So shall I live to speak myfather's words.
"Happy am I that have a man sobold
"that dares do justice on myproper son,
"and not less happy, having sucha son,
"that would deliver up hisgreatness
so into the hands of justice."
You did commit me,
for which, I do commit into yourhand the unstained sword
that you have used to bear, withthis remembrance:
that you use the same
with the like bold, just, andimpartial spirit
that you have used 'gainst me.
There is my hand.
You shall be as a father to myyouth.
My voice shall sound as you doprompt mine ear,
and I will stoop and humble myintents
to your well-practiced, wisedirections.
And, princes all, believe me, Ibeseech you.
My father is gone wild into hisgrave,
for in his tomb lie myaffections.
And with his spirit sadly Isurvive
to mock the expectation of theworld, to frustrate prophecies,
and to raze out rotten opinion,
who hath writ me down after myseeming.
The tide of blood in me
hath proudly flowed in vanitytill now.
Now doth it turn and ebb back tothe sea,
where it shall mingle with thestate of floods
and flow henceforth in formalmajesty.
Now call we our high court ofparliament.
And let us choose such limbs ofnoble counsel
that the great body of our statemay go
in equal rank with the bestgoverned nation,
that war or peace or both atonce
may be as things acquainted andfamiliar to us,
in which you, Father, shall haveforemost hand.
Our coronation done, we willaccite,
as I before remembered, all ourstate.
And, God consigning to my goodintents,
no prince nor peer shall havejust cause to say,
"God shorten Harry's happy lifeone day."
God save the king!
Sir John, you shall see myorchard,
where, in an arbor,
we will eat the last year'spippin of my own grafting
and a dish of caraways, and soforth.
Come, cousin Silence, and thento bed.
'Fore God, you have a goodlydwelling here and rich.
Barren, barren, barren.
Beggars all; beggars all, SirJohn.
Marry, good air.
Well spread, Davy; well spread,Davy.
Well said, Davy.
This Davy serves you in gooduses.
He is your servingman and yourhusband.
He's a good varlet, a goodvarlet, a good varlet.
He's a good varlet, Sir John.
Oh, by the mass, I have drunktoo much sack at supper.
A good varlet.
Now sit down.
Come on.
Come, Cousin.
Ah, sirrah, quotha,
we shall do nothing but eat andmake good cheer
and praise God for a merry year,
when flesh is cheap and femalesdear
and lusty lads roam here andthere,
so merrily, so merrily,
and ever anon so merrily.
There's a merry heart.
Good Master Silence, I'll giveyou a health for that anon.
Davy, give Master Bardolph somewine.
Sweet sir, sit.
I'll be with you anon.
Most sweet sir, sit.
Master page, good master page,sit.
And what you want in meat, we'llhave in drink.
But you must bear.
The heart's all.
Master Bardolph, be merry,
and, my little soldier there, bemerry.
Be merry; be merry.
My wife has all.
Women are shrews, both short andtall.
'Tis merry in hall when beardslack all
and welcome merry shrovetide.
Be merry; be merry.
I did not think Master Silence
to have been a man of thismettle.
An't please your worship,
there's one Pistol come from thecourt with news.
From the court?
Let him come in.
How now, Pistol.
Sir John, God save you.
What wind blew you hither,Pistol?
Not the ill wind that blows noman to good.
Sweet knight,
thou art now one of the greatestmen in this realm.
Sir John, I am thy Pistol andthy friend.
And helter-skelter have I rodeto thee,
and tidings do I bring
and lucky joys and golden timesand happy news of price.
I pray you now, deliver themlike a man of this world.
A fouter for the world andworldlings base.
I speak of Africa and goldenjoys.
Oh, base Assyrian knight, whatis thy news?
Let King Cophetua know the truththereof.
Give me your pardon, sir.
If, sir, you come from the courtwith news,
I take it there's but two ways,
either to utter them or concealthem.
I am, sir, under the king, insome authority.
Under which king, Besonian?
Speak or die.
Under King Harry.
Harry IV or
Harry IV.
A fouter for thine office.
Sir John, thy tender lambkin nowis king.
Harry V's the man.
If Pistol lie, do this
and fig me like the braggingSpaniard.
What?
Is the old king dead?
As nail in door.
The things I speak are just.
Bardolph.
Away, Bardolph.
Saddle my horse.
Master Robert Shallow,
choose what office thou wilt inthe land.
'Tis thine.
Pistol, I will double chargethee with dignities.
Oh, joyful day.
I would not take a knighthoodfor my fortune.
I do bring good news.
Master Robert Shallowó my LordShallowó
be what thou wilt.
I am fortune's steward.
But go on.
Get on thy boots.
We'll ride all night.
Oh, sweet Pistol.
Away, Bardolph.
Here, boot, boot, MasterShallow.
I know the young king is sickfor me.
Oh, let us take any man'shorses.
The laws of England are at mycommandment.
Blessed are they that have beenmy friends,
and woe to my lord chiefjustice.
Come!
Stand back!
Standóstand here by me, MasterRobert Shallow.
I will make the king do yougrace.
I will leer upon him as a' comesby.
And do but mark the countenancehe will give me.
God bless thy lungs, goodknight.
Come here, Pistol.
Stand behind me.
Oh, I would I'd had time to havemade new liveries.
I would have bestowed
the thousand pound I borrowed ofyou.
But 'tis no matter.
This poor show doth better.
This doth infer the zeal I hadto see him.
It doth so.
It shows my earnestness ofaffection.
It dothó
My devotionó
It doth; it doth; it doth.
As it were, to ride day andnight,
and not to deliberate, not toremember,
not to have patience to shiftmeó
'Tis best, certain.
But to stand stained with travel
and sweating with desire to seehim,
thinking of nothing else,
putting all affairs else intooblivion,
as if there were nothing else tobe done but to see him.
God save Thy Grace, King Hal.
My royal Hal.
God save thee, my sweet boy.
My lord chief justice, speak tothat vain man.
Have you your wits?
Know you what 'tis you speak?
My king.
My Jove.
I speak to thee, my heart.
I know thee not, old man.
Fall to thy prayers.
How ill white hairs become afool and jester.
I have long dreamt of such akind of man,
so surfeit swelled, so old, andso profane.
But, being awaked, I do despisemy dream.
Make less thy body hence andmore thy grace.
Leave gormandizing.
Know the grave doth gape forthee
thrice wider than for other men.
Reply not to me with a fool bornjest.
Presume not I am the thing Iwas,
for God doth know, so shall theworld perceive,
that I have turned away myformer self.
So will I those that kept mecompany.
When thou dost hear I am as Ihave been,
approach me, and thou shalt beas thou wast,
the tutor and feeder of myriots.
Till then, I banish thee, onpain of death,
as I have done the rest of mymisleaders,
not to come near our person byten mile.
For competence of life, I willallow you
that lack of means enforce younot to evils.
And, as we hear you do reformyourselves,
we will, according to yourstrengths and qualities,
give you advancement.
Be it your charge, my lord,
to see performed the tenor ofour word.
Set on.
God save the king!
Master Shallow,
I owe you a thousand pound.
Marry, Sir John,
which I beseech you to let mehave home with me.
That can hardly be, MasterShallow.
Do not you grieve at this.
I shall be sent for in privateto him.
Look, he must seem thus to theworld.
Fear not your advancement.
I shall be the man yet that willmake you great.
I cannot perceive how,
unless you give me your doubletand stuff me out with straw.
I beseech you, Sir John,
let me have 500 of my 1,000.
Sir, I will be as good as myword.
This that you heard was but acolor.
A color I fear you will die in,Sir John.
Oh, no, fear no colors.
Come.
Go with me to dinner.
Come, Lieutenant Pistol.
Come, Bardolph.
I shall be sent for to him inprivate at night.
Carry Sir John Falstaff to thefleet.
Take all his company along withhim.
My lord.
I cannot now speak.
I shall hear you soon.
Take them away.
"Si fortuna me tormenta, sperome contento."
I like this fair proceeding ofthe king's.
He hath intent his wontedfollowers
shall all be very well providedfor,
but all are banished till theirconversations
appear more wise and modest tothe world.
And so they are.
The king hath called hisparliament, my lord.
He hath.
I will lay odds that, ere thisyear expire,
we bear our civil swords andnative fire as far as France.
I heard a bird so sing, whosemusic, to my thinking,
pleased the king.